Okay.
NOTE CONF
It is ten past, so we will get started.
It's week ten.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, it's the end.
There are vision lectures next week, but this week is
NOTE CONF
the last week of new material.
Um.
NOTE CONF
And then you've learnt every bit of linear algebra you
ever need to know.
NOTE CONF
Um, so please do log on to both the attendance
and the questions will clap.
NOTE CONF
Um, but while we do that, uh.
Oh, talkative.
NOTE CONF
We've turn.
Um.
NOTE CONF
So we've jumped to chapter eight.
We may have skipped over a couple of chapters there.
NOTE CONF
Um, feel free to go and read chapter six and
seven if you want.
NOTE CONF
Uh, they're not actually got much new material in there.
All stuff you've seen before, but they're generalising away from
NOTE CONF
real vectors.
So when we've been talking about vectors, we've been talking
NOTE CONF
about vectors in our n.
So lists of real numbers.
NOTE CONF
Um, and kind of we've built up what that means
geometrically and algebraically.
NOTE CONF
Turns out you can generalise everything we've done to vectors
that aren't necessarily just lists of numbers.
NOTE CONF
Um, so that's what chapter six and seven are doing.
They're building up this definition of a vector space and
NOTE CONF
looking at kind of generalised linear algebra, where you've not
just got vectors.
NOTE CONF
In some ways the linear algebra is not changed.
It's just the vectors have changed.
NOTE CONF
Feel free to go give it a read if you
want.
NOTE CONF
At some point, lots of you will end up studying
that type of linear algebra.
NOTE CONF
But that is not what we're doing in this course.
So we skip to chapter eight sticking with our real
NOTE CONF
vectors.
And we are this week going to talk about orthogonal
NOTE CONF
stuff.
Um, so I'm going to get rid of I think
NOTE CONF
this is the attendance will clap is going to go
away.
NOTE CONF
But there's the code for people who want it.
Um, so this week.
NOTE CONF
We're in Thursday's lecture.
Um, let's start with the true and false question.
NOTE CONF
If I have a list of vectors that is a
basis of some subspace, you in R1.
NOTE CONF
So I'm giving you some subspace and I'm giving you
a basis for that subspace.
NOTE CONF
And then I'm going to give you a point in
your subspace.
NOTE CONF
Is it true that I can write x as this
sum.
NOTE CONF
So the dot product of x with v1 times v1.
And then the dot product of x with v2 times
NOTE CONF
v2, um, and so on and so forth.
So I'm going to give you a minute to think
NOTE CONF
about that.
Is it true that x can be written as a
NOTE CONF
linear sum of dot products and vectors?
Well, I'm going to give you.
NOTE CONF
What are we up to?
About nearly halfway.
NOTE CONF
If you voted.
So I'll give you an extra 30s.
NOTE CONF
Have a chat.
What are we thinking?
NOTE CONF
Take a guess.
Okay, over half you have voted, so you've got ten
NOTE CONF
more seconds.
Take a guess.
NOTE CONF
Put your vote in.
Now is the chance.
NOTE CONF
Five more seconds.
Two more seconds.
NOTE CONF
One more second.
Oh, okay.
NOTE CONF
This is interesting.
We are fairly split.
NOTE CONF
Quite neatly split, actually.
Uh, we're about 5050.
NOTE CONF
Which?
Which is.
NOTE CONF
This is impressive.
This is good.
NOTE CONF
We have some discussion.
Um, let's see what the comments are.
NOTE CONF
Lemma 8.1.1 Thursday.
Slump.
NOTE CONF
Absolutely fair.
Uh, Thursday slump in week ten, no less.
NOTE CONF
Um, adding the scalar multiplied by a vector gives a
vector.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
So we are.
NOTE CONF
We are.
This thing should be a vector.
NOTE CONF
We're adding a load of vectors together.
Um, what are false people saying we're missing the vice
NOTE CONF
needed divide, not normalised.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, anyone got anything else to add to that?
Why is it important that we're normalised?
NOTE CONF
Why?
Why are people talking about normalisation?
NOTE CONF
Hmm.
Is normalisation important at all?
NOTE CONF
Actually, that's a good question.
Um, let us have another moment, then.
NOTE CONF
Talk to your neighbour.
Try and convince them you're right and they're wrong.
NOTE CONF
Because, you know half of you are wrong, right?
And half are you wrong.
NOTE CONF
So find someone and let's have another 30s.
See if you can convince me whether we points have
NOTE CONF
been raised or not.
And hey, it's Thursday.
NOTE CONF
Feel free to just guess.
And just under.
NOTE CONF
Him he doesn't have my little eye.
Equals one on the bottom.
NOTE CONF
What?
I'm going to give you another 30s then.
NOTE CONF
What are we thinking?
Oh, you've all gone very quiet.
NOTE CONF
Take this chance to vote.
We've still not had half of you vote.
NOTE CONF
So vote.
Enter the democratic spirit.
NOTE CONF
It's important.
I'll give you 20 more seconds of voting time.
NOTE CONF
The electorate seems to be growing, though, so.
Okay, we're exactly halfway.
NOTE CONF
Ten more seconds.
No, we're not anymore.
NOTE CONF
There we go.
Okay, let's keep going.
NOTE CONF
Can we get to 80?
I'm going to close voting when we get to 80
NOTE CONF
votes.
So I need eight more voters, please.
NOTE CONF
Oh, seven more voters.
Five more voters, two more voters.
NOTE CONF
One more voter.
Yay!
NOTE CONF
We made 80.
How exciting.
NOTE CONF
Okay, what are we saying this time?
Okay, now we seem to have lots more.
NOTE CONF
People are saying we're false.
We seem to have had a change of heart.
NOTE CONF
Um, I do not think they're necessarily orthogonal, uh, magnitudes
to be incorrect if not divided by the norm, because
NOTE CONF
they're not linearly dependent guessing.
That's absolutely fine.
NOTE CONF
You're allowed to guess.
It's only true when the basis is orthonormal.
NOTE CONF
Otherwise it is false.
Linear combinations of basis vectors.
NOTE CONF
Combinations of linearly independent vectors.
You're right.
NOTE CONF
Both of those statements are right.
Actually, they are combinations of linear independent vectors.
NOTE CONF
How do I know that my vectors are linearly independent
because they're a basis?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
To be a basis you need two conditions one linear
NOTE CONF
independence.
What's the other one.
NOTE CONF
Begins with s spanning.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Perfect.
So you need to span and you need to be
NOTE CONF
linearly independent.
We know we're linearly independent and we know we span.
NOTE CONF
So so far is looking so good.
Uh, the correct answer is false.
NOTE CONF
Yay!
Well done.
NOTE CONF
We moved in the right direction.
Um, part of the reason is because we do need
NOTE CONF
to divide by the norm.
Um, let's just talk about Oopsy daisy.
NOTE CONF
That's not what I wanted to do.
Let's talk about this one.
NOTE CONF
Uh, I do not think so.
Unless they're orthogonal.
NOTE CONF
Are they orthogonal?
That is true.
NOTE CONF
It is not true unless all your vectors are orthogonal.
Actually, this other statement is very true.
NOTE CONF
Uh, blah blah blah.
It's only when the basis is orthonormal are we orthogonal
NOTE CONF
though.
So we're not normalised.
NOTE CONF
We know it's false because they're not normalised.
Are our vectors orthogonal?
NOTE CONF
What are we thinking.
No okay.
NOTE CONF
Let's let's I like this thumbs down for no.
Thumbs up for yes.
NOTE CONF
Shoulder shrug for I don't know.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
We are generally voting no.
NOTE CONF
I'm liking this.
No voting.
NOTE CONF
Yeah good.
It is true that so all of these things are
NOTE CONF
true.
It is true that they're not normalised.
NOTE CONF
We need them to be normalised.
Otherwise this number they're that dot product is going to
NOTE CONF
be the wrong size.
So we need them to be normalised.
NOTE CONF
But we also need them to be orthogonal.
If they're not orthogonal then things go very wrong as
NOTE CONF
I am hopefully about to demonstrate.
Um, that is the one I want.
NOTE CONF
I don't want the axes there.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um.
Can I shift this over?
NOTE CONF
Do do do do do.
Uh, sorry.
NOTE CONF
Give me half a second.
Let's do this.
NOTE CONF
Um, I don't know why I'm in Spanish today, but
there we go.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so let us.
Look at this vector.
NOTE CONF
So we're going to have two basis vectors.
We've got um we've got this blue one and we've
NOTE CONF
got this orange one.
So those are my two basis vectors that are sitting
NOTE CONF
on my plane.
Uh, they span my plane.
NOTE CONF
They they are not they're linearly independent.
So these two vectors are a basis.
NOTE CONF
Um, we're then going to consider this vector x, which
doesn't lie on my plane.
NOTE CONF
It's just some vector over here.
Um, and we're going to consider a projection down onto
NOTE CONF
my basis.
And the projection is this, uh, little green vector here.
NOTE CONF
Um, if my vectors are not orthogonal, then this projection,
we kind of want it to be where that dotted
NOTE CONF
line is.
That would kind of is our intuitive understanding of what
NOTE CONF
the projection should be.
Um, but but the green vector is not going to
NOTE CONF
the dotted line.
Uh, when they're not orthogonal, we do not get the
NOTE CONF
projection we kind of want.
We're not getting the kind of straightforward coordinates.
NOTE CONF
Um, this isn't telling us what we want to what
it kind of wants us to tell.
NOTE CONF
Even if all of these are normalised.
It's still not.
NOTE CONF
It's not even pointing in the right direction.
So if we're not got a normalised basis, then at
NOTE CONF
least that formula in the question would give us a
vector in the right direction.
NOTE CONF
It would just be.
Actually, that's not necessarily true.
NOTE CONF
Um, but but here it's it's giving us kind of
complete nonsense.
NOTE CONF
That projection vector is not at all what we want.
Um, whereas if I fix it so my basis vectors
NOTE CONF
are orthogonal, um, then I do get exactly the projection
vector that I want, which makes me happy because I
NOTE CONF
get maths as being nice.
It's doing what I wanted to do.
NOTE CONF
The other thing to bear in mind is if when
they're not, um, when they're not orthogonal, then if I
NOTE CONF
change my basis vectors, my projection changes.
So all I'm doing there is changing one of my
NOTE CONF
basis vectors and my projection keeps changing.
It shouldn't be the case that when I project down
NOTE CONF
onto a plane, if I change how I'm like put
vectors on that plane, it shouldn't matter what how I'm
NOTE CONF
defining that plane, the projection should always be the same.
Whereas when I am orthogonal, I can change those bases,
NOTE CONF
but my projection is not changing, which is exactly what
we want.
NOTE CONF
So actually we only ever want an orthonormal normal basis
norm also gives us the right sizes.
NOTE CONF
Um, but we really do want that orthogonality condition.
Otherwise, weird and wonderful terrible things happen and we don't
NOTE CONF
want that case.
Cool.
NOTE CONF
Are we all happy?
Do we have any questions or thoughts?
NOTE CONF
Feelings?
Comments?
NOTE CONF
No.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, so the normalised basis makes life easier.
But we can of course do, um, we could change
NOTE CONF
this formula to make it work for a non normalised
basis.
NOTE CONF
We just have to divide by the norm of VI's.
Um, cool.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So what this allows us to do is we're essentially
NOTE CONF
saying we can always this is that form is giving
us the coordinates of a point with regards to a
NOTE CONF
certain basis.
So if we think about it in terms of standard,
NOTE CONF
um, or when the be used to.
So let's do R2.
NOTE CONF
We have x and y we're very used to.
If I give you a vector we can write this
NOTE CONF
as the .23 for example, which is saying we're going
to along in the x and three along in the
NOTE CONF
y.
That's exactly what that formula is saying to this projection
NOTE CONF
is giving us.
The kind of coordinate points, uh, well, when it's, when
NOTE CONF
it's normalised, um, in relation to whatever basis we're picking,
I could equally pick this basis.
NOTE CONF
Uh, there we go.
That's still at right angles.
NOTE CONF
And if I pick the same vector, then I'm going
to have different coordinates depending on my different basis.
NOTE CONF
But I'm still finding essentially the coordinates with that projection.
So what would essentially be able to do is splitting
NOTE CONF
up our subspace into the different orthogonal directions we can
walk into.
NOTE CONF
Everybody happy with that thought?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, it also means something quite cool.
NOTE CONF
It's saying we can always put coordinate system on any
vector space, which I appreciate.
NOTE CONF
We've skipped chapters six and seven, which generally deal with
generalised vector spaces, but that's still quite a cool thing
NOTE CONF
if you think about it.
You could always put coordinates on how big your vector
NOTE CONF
space gets.
Even if you're talking about a subspace, you can always
NOTE CONF
put a coordinate system on it, which is fun because
coordinate geometry is a lot easier to do than anything
NOTE CONF
else.
Okay, so, um, that is false.
NOTE CONF
If I give you a subspace, though, does there exist
one orthonormal basis I've just said.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So the.
NOTE CONF
Previous one, if that was specified as an orthonormal.
Basis, that would be true.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, it'd be true if it was an orthonormal basis.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
So now we know there's always an orthonormal basis.
That's that's what we find out in the reading.
NOTE CONF
If I give you a subspace that exists an orthonormal
basis, is it true that there is only one orthonormal
NOTE CONF
basis?
Uh, so another true false question I'm going to give
NOTE CONF
you again a couple of minutes to sit and talk
this through.
NOTE CONF
Um, we can always find a orthonormal basis.
Is it true there is one orthonormal basis?
NOTE CONF
About a quarter of the way there.
Bom bom bom bom.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to give you an extra oh about half
you voted.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to give you an extra 10s.
Five seconds.
NOTE CONF
Three seconds.
Two seconds.
NOTE CONF
What do I want to change?
I want to change this one.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Uh, so we're split about two thirds to one third.
NOTE CONF
False to true.
Um, anyone want to justify an answer?
NOTE CONF
Anyone want to pick a side?
Why are we thinking false?
NOTE CONF
That seems popular.
Um, because you can rotate your basis.
NOTE CONF
Um, you can have multiple orthonormal basis.
Because the Gram-Schmidt process, you can rotate all orthonormal vectors.
NOTE CONF
Um, yeah, I think I agree.
Anything with false.
NOTE CONF
No.
You can rotate your basis vectors.
NOTE CONF
Um, yes.
You can rotate your basis vectors, which means your false.
NOTE CONF
Um, yeah.
It is true.
NOTE CONF
It is true that you can rotate your basis vectors
and therefore the statement is false.
NOTE CONF
Um, there is not exactly one orthonormal basis except in
one case.
NOTE CONF
Can anyone think of the one case where it is
true?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
The zero vector.
NOTE CONF
The zero.
Vector.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
There are two cases.
NOTE CONF
There's the null case.
There was one other one, which is a bit boring
NOTE CONF
in some regards where there was only one orthonormal basis.
Anyone think of it?
NOTE CONF
There's the boring null.
Well, the null case isn't boring, but you know the
NOTE CONF
special case.
What about when my basis only has one vector?
NOTE CONF
What's my subspace, then?
If I've only got one vector in my basis, what
NOTE CONF
am I, a line?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
If I've only got one vector in my subspace, then
I've only got one orthonormal vector.
NOTE CONF
So yes.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
But that's basically the same vector.
We don't really you know, my minus one is I
NOTE CONF
wouldn't count that as a different basis.
Um, it's not a different vector.
NOTE CONF
It's just you've scaled it.
Um, so yeah, there is only one orthonormal basis.
NOTE CONF
Um, in that case.
Cool.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we are going well.
NOTE CONF
And lots of people have mentioned the Gram-Schmidt process, which
is great because it's one of my favourite bits of
NOTE CONF
this course.
I love the Gram-Schmidt process.
NOTE CONF
I don't really know why.
Everyone I know loves the Gram-Schmidt process.
NOTE CONF
Um, but there we go.
So, um, let us consider a three dimensional vector space
NOTE CONF
subspace.
Um, I'm going to call it U, and it's going
NOTE CONF
to sit in R4.
There we go.
NOTE CONF
And it's going to be spanned by three vectors.
Um you one, you two and you three.
NOTE CONF
Um, so hopefully these are all sufficiently nice numbers.
Uh, does anyone want to tell me what step one
NOTE CONF
of the Gram-Schmidt process is?
What do I do?
NOTE CONF
What is the Gram-Schmidt process first?
What's the aim here?
NOTE CONF
The aim is to find what kind of basis.
And yeah, an orthogonal basis.
NOTE CONF
You can even go further and find an orthonormal basis.
So you can take any basis you want and make
NOTE CONF
it an orthogonal basis, which is really quite fun because
orthogonal stuff is a lot more fun, whereas finding a
NOTE CONF
basis, it's a lot easier to find a general basis
than it is an orthogonal basis.
NOTE CONF
But to do any calculations, it's a lot easier to
do an orthogonal basis.
NOTE CONF
So that's kind of bridges the calculation gap.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So there is a basis.
What is step one of the Gram-Schmidt process.
NOTE CONF
Does anyone.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Perfect I'm going to set the first vector to be
the first bit of my orthogonal basis.
NOTE CONF
There we go.
Step one.
NOTE CONF
Done.
Hooray!
NOTE CONF
One vector down two to go.
Uh, what is step two?
NOTE CONF
Oops.
That's not what I meant to do.
NOTE CONF
Um, so there I've got three vectors, and I've now
set one to be my basis vectors.
NOTE CONF
I've made it blue.
What?
NOTE CONF
Step two.
Anyone got any ideas?
NOTE CONF
Anyone got a word they want to throw at me?
Projection.
NOTE CONF
That's the word I was looking for.
Good.
NOTE CONF
So, as we've seen several times, the second one we're
going to project onto the basis vector we have and
NOTE CONF
then throw away the bit that's in the direction.
So I'm going to take I'm going to ignore you
NOTE CONF
uh the third vector for a bit because we don't
really worry about that.
NOTE CONF
And I'm just going to consider, uh, let's see if
I can move this so we can see.
NOTE CONF
There we go.
I'm going to project it down onto the basis vector
NOTE CONF
we have.
And then I'm going to think about the bit we
NOTE CONF
have left over.
And that's going to be orthogonal.
NOTE CONF
So let's do that.
Mathematically we've got I'm going to take you to the
NOTE CONF
second vector and I'm going to project it down onto
F1.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to subtract away the projection.
How do I do what's on the top of my
NOTE CONF
projection?
What do I need to dot with what.
NOTE CONF
I've got you to what am I going to dot
you to with F1.
NOTE CONF
Good.
And then I'm going to divide by F1 divided dotted
NOTE CONF
with F1 the norm of F1.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
What is this dot product?
Anyone want to yell it out to me?
NOTE CONF
Minus one times one plus minus one times one, minus
two.
NOTE CONF
Good.
So minus two.
NOTE CONF
And then what's this dot product on the bottom.
Six.
NOTE CONF
Good.
And I'm times seeing this by minus one zero.
NOTE CONF
No I'm not I'm doing it minus one.
I'm doing plus one.
NOTE CONF
What am I doing?
I don't know, it's week ten.
NOTE CONF
Okay, that's what I'm typing by.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Can I trust myself to do maths up here?
I don't know, yell at me when I make a
NOTE CONF
mistake.
Minus one plus a third is minus two thirds zero
NOTE CONF
plus two thirds.
Minus two thirds is minus two thirds.
NOTE CONF
Zero plus zero is zero.
I hope minus one plus a third is still minus
NOTE CONF
two thirds.
Does anyone disagree with me?
NOTE CONF
No.
Cool.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so that is one vector that is perfectly it's
orthogonal.
NOTE CONF
We're good to go.
But I'm actually going to take F2 just to be
NOTE CONF
1101.
Why am I going to do that.
NOTE CONF
Yeah the numbers are nicer.
There are no fractions.
NOTE CONF
There are no negative signs.
I'm far, far less likely to make a mistake with
NOTE CONF
that one than I am that one.
I contaminate by one.
NOTE CONF
Something by minus two thirds is, you know, maybe left
to when it's not a Thursday afternoon and week ten.
NOTE CONF
Um, so let's make our lives easier.
All we care about is the direction.
NOTE CONF
At this point, we don't care about the size, so
I might as well pick a vector that's got nice
NOTE CONF
numbers in any questions or we all happy so far.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So then we've got so what have we done here.
Let's go back to this thing.
NOTE CONF
We've taken away the we found this vector.
We did the subtraction.
NOTE CONF
And then we're going to set that to be our
second uh basis vector.
NOTE CONF
So all we're doing is shifting this vector so its
tail is at the origin.
NOTE CONF
So everything meets at the origin.
It makes life easier.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So I've now got, uh, let's get rid of some
NOTE CONF
stuff.
There we go.
NOTE CONF
I've now just got two vectors, Um, but I also
have with U3 I've got my third vector.
NOTE CONF
Um, so what should I do for you three?
How can I find my third basis vector in my
NOTE CONF
on all basis?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Small projections.
Well done.
NOTE CONF
Um, so we're going to do the same thing again,
but we need to project both onto the U1 vector
NOTE CONF
and onto the, the both onto the F1 vector and
the F2 vector.
NOTE CONF
So we're going to and then subtract both.
So we are doing F3 is going to be this
NOTE CONF
initial vector minus its projection onto F1.
Uh we can steal a bit from F1.
NOTE CONF
We now know that this denominator is going to be
six.
NOTE CONF
So let's save ourselves some time.
Um.
NOTE CONF
What is this dot product, though?
Uh, one minus two zero one.
NOTE CONF
Anyone got any ideas?
What's this?
NOTE CONF
Minus one.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Good.
So we have 1100 times minus one over six minus.
NOTE CONF
So let's just make that plus a sixth of one
minus two zero one.
NOTE CONF
Then what's this dot product two.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
And this one three.
Good.
NOTE CONF
Okay I'm going to leave you to do vector addition
because hopefully you've had enough practice now.
NOTE CONF
But hopefully if you do all of that and it
all works out and nothing goes terribly wrong.
NOTE CONF
You should end up with a half zero zero one
half.
NOTE CONF
Hopefully that's what I got this morning.
Um, are we all happy with how that works, though?
NOTE CONF
It's very iterative, so I can keep going.
I'm just projecting down each time.
NOTE CONF
So let's think about what we just did.
Geometrically.
NOTE CONF
We projected onto v one, uh, and then we did
a bit of subtraction.
NOTE CONF
Um, and we can also project onto V2 and do
some subtraction.
NOTE CONF
And if we do both those subtractions at the same
time, we end up with this vector v three.
NOTE CONF
And all we're going to do is shift that vector.
So it's at the origin.
NOTE CONF
And that's going to give us our orthonormal basis from
our.
NOTE CONF
Well no it's not.
It's going to give us an orthogonal basis from our
NOTE CONF
general basis that we found somewhere, which is really fun
and cool.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Are we all happy.
NOTE CONF
Wonderful.
So we now have I'm going to make again, make
NOTE CONF
this a bit nicer, I'm going to say it's 1001
for hopefully obvious reasons.
NOTE CONF
Um.
So that we've got an orthogonal basis also looking good.
NOTE CONF
I can make it an orthonormal basis.
How can I make it an orthonormal basis?
NOTE CONF
Normalise it.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Which is yet another reason for picking nice numbers that
I can immediately see the norm is root two.
NOTE CONF
Um, I didn't really have to do any maths for
that one.
NOTE CONF
I might have to think for half a second more.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Not loads time or hopefully that is not that hard
to do, but it's harder than that.
NOTE CONF
And if we're trying to do lots of things, let's
always pick the easier.
NOTE CONF
Which mathematicians are lazy.
I've said that before.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so we can find an orthonormal basis just by
normalising all of that.
NOTE CONF
And then life is really easy and we're all good
to go.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
So this example is in R3 because I can't show
NOTE CONF
you an example in our food because the world doesn't
work that way.
NOTE CONF
Um, but this example is actually in our force.
So I've got a fourth direction to play with.
NOTE CONF
It's not on my plane.
You it's in another direction.
NOTE CONF
But we could keep going.
So does someone want to yell at me?
NOTE CONF
Another vector?
Um, hopefully with nicest numbers, I'm going to make the
NOTE CONF
first one zero.
Someone yell a number at me.
NOTE CONF
One.
I like that number.
NOTE CONF
Someone yell another number of me, minus one I also
like that number and I'm going to pick zero.
NOTE CONF
There we go.
Okay, this is another vector which.
NOTE CONF
I.
Believe you can.
NOTE CONF
You can take a stab in the dark and or
you, you check this yourself or you can believe me,
NOTE CONF
this does not lie in the span of the previous
three vectors.
NOTE CONF
This does not lie in you.
Um, so what if we do Gram-Schmidt again?
NOTE CONF
What are we going to happen?
What's going to happen now?
NOTE CONF
I could keep going.
What's going to happen?
NOTE CONF
Let's try let's do X and then I'm going to
minus.
NOTE CONF
The projection onto you War or F1 of x times
x minus the projection onto F2.
NOTE CONF
That should be an F1.
Sorry uh of x f2 minus the projection of f3
NOTE CONF
x times f3.
That's a lot of maths.
NOTE CONF
Let's feel free to go away and do that.
But you should end up with the answer zero zero.
NOTE CONF
Uh, minus one and zero.
Okay, I magically did a load of maths very quickly
NOTE CONF
in front of you.
Feel free to take my word for that.
NOTE CONF
But that's the answer.
Um, what is that vector?
NOTE CONF
How does that relate to what we had before?
How does that relate to you?
NOTE CONF
It's orthogonal.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
It's by definition orthogonal, um, to everything in you, to
anything in the span of F1, F2 and F3 it's
NOTE CONF
got to be orthogonal to um.
And this gives us this is known as.
NOTE CONF
Do you remember in the book what this was called.
Everything that's orthogonal to a subset words beginning with C.
NOTE CONF
And you all remember this.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So this is U perp this is the orthogonal complement.
And this is the entire the orthogonal complement for the
NOTE CONF
in this case.
So where we have a plane a three dimensional plane
NOTE CONF
in four dimensional space, the orthogonal complement is a line.
Because I've got four dimensions overall I used three of
NOTE CONF
them up in my plane and I've only got one
left.
NOTE CONF
So it's a line.
In fact, it's the normal line to the plane.
NOTE CONF
Um, I'll give you a little hint about how I
quickly did a load of maths.
NOTE CONF
Uh, if we look at the original subspace, um, this
was the plane defined by Z equals zero.
NOTE CONF
Um, this vector doesn't have z equals zero.
The normal is just the z axis.
NOTE CONF
Um, x3 equals zero.
Um.
NOTE CONF
But there we go.
There were several ways of doing that.
NOTE CONF
That's just a kind of sneaky fun trick.
Um.
NOTE CONF
So yes, the orthogonal complement is just everything that is
left over.
NOTE CONF
If you have a subspace, you can always form an
orthogonal basis.
NOTE CONF
You can always keep adding to your orthogonal basis to
cover your whole space, because your whole space is in
NOTE CONF
a subspace too.
So it has also has an orthogonal basis and everything
NOTE CONF
that is not in your subspace, everything afterwards that defines
the basis for your orthogonal complement.
NOTE CONF
Um, which also means that the dimension of your orthogonal
complement is n minus the dimension of your subspace, which
NOTE CONF
again makes sense.
Okay, let us do another question, because you have listened
NOTE CONF
to me, Witter, for a while.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Oops, that's not what I meant to click.
So, yes, we can always extend our basis.
NOTE CONF
Which of the following is true?
If you have a subspace W and a point X
NOTE CONF
in Arwen, which is not in W, which is true.
Which of the following is true?
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to give you.
Oh, we've not got long left.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to give you a minute or two to,
uh, have a think about this.
NOTE CONF
And then we will.
Come back together.
NOTE CONF
Feel free to have a chat.
Have a vote.
NOTE CONF
What are we thinking?
You all being very quiet.
NOTE CONF
It's that because this is a very easy question.
Very hard question.
NOTE CONF
It's one or the other.
But a third of the way there.
NOTE CONF
No, a quarter of the way there do do do.
doo.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to give you an extra 30s.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
We're nearly halfway there, so an extra 15.
We've not got much time left.
NOTE CONF
How are you?
Ever so slightly.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Ten more seconds.
NOTE CONF
Five more seconds.
Three more seconds.
NOTE CONF
Two.
One.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so, um, again, we're fairly divided.
I mean, even even the first option that no one's
NOTE CONF
commented on is it's about 20%.
Is it?
NOTE CONF
Nothing.
Um, so, yes, we seem a bit divided.
NOTE CONF
Okay, let's see what the comments are saying.
Uh, so we've got a point that's not in W,
NOTE CONF
which is the following is true.
Um, I saw your screen and it was the most
NOTE CONF
popular.
Fair enough.
NOTE CONF
It didn't remain the most popular.
Um, for one x equals w t.
NOTE CONF
It would not be in w o.
I assume that means w perp.
NOTE CONF
Fair enough.
Um, it's the orthogonal complement.
NOTE CONF
Since x is not on, W, must have some component
w and some in W perpendicular.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Any other thoughts?
What does it mean if your projection onto something is
NOTE CONF
the identity?
What does that mean for the thing you're projecting?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
It's got to be in your subspace.
NOTE CONF
Because if you're projecting something, if I'm projecting something that's
already in my subspace, then I'm projecting it to itself.
NOTE CONF
Um, if my vector is in my hand, then I
can't project it onto my hand anymore.
NOTE CONF
Um, so one would be true if X is in
the perp.
NOTE CONF
If in the bum.
Huh?
NOTE CONF
Let's try that sentence again.
The first one would be true if X was in
NOTE CONF
W complement?
That makes sense.
NOTE CONF
Um, when would the second one be true?
When would our projection be absolutely zero?
NOTE CONF
Yeah, if you're completely orthogonal.
So if it was in W.
NOTE CONF
So actually bear in mind we know we're not in
W.
NOTE CONF
It absolutely can't be the second one because we're not
um we're not in W and W is perpendicular to
NOTE CONF
w perp hence their names.
Um, so two is the one that is absolutely never
NOTE CONF
the case.
Uh, three.
NOTE CONF
It's something else.
Why might it be something else?
NOTE CONF
It could be a mix of both.
Exactly.
NOTE CONF
All we've said is X is not in W.
We've not said X is in the orthogonal complement.
NOTE CONF
So if x is in the orthogonal complement then we're
in the case one.
NOTE CONF
And the projection is going to be x.
If we're not we know we're definitely not two because
NOTE CONF
that would mean we're in W.
But if we're just a vector with some component in
NOTE CONF
the complement and some component in W, then overall we're
going to be neither x or zero.
NOTE CONF
We're going to be something in between.
Cool.
NOTE CONF
Do we have any other questions or comments or anything
else?
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Why does that projection not be the orthogonal complement?
NOTE CONF
Which what do you mean?
Surely it's projecting onto the, um, complement of that, uh,
NOTE CONF
subspace.
So it would be complementary.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
But there could be a component of X that is
NOTE CONF
in the is in W.
So we can split X into something that's there's a
NOTE CONF
part of x that projects down onto W and pop
the projects down onto W, so it's neither in W
NOTE CONF
or W perp.
It's a mixture of the two.
NOTE CONF
Does that make sense?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Any other questions?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
If you think about it in terms of like the
standard basis, you're not in E1, you're not in E2,
NOTE CONF
not in the x direction.
In the y direction.
NOTE CONF
You could be some line in between.
So you've got some component of the x direction of
NOTE CONF
some component in the y direction.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, let us say yes.
If it was true we'd line W if it was
NOTE CONF
an we'd line w perp.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
So now let's look at a firm 8.4.1, uh, which
kind of brings up, brings together everything we've said so
NOTE CONF
far.
Um, so it turns out the projection is a linear
NOTE CONF
transformation.
We've seen this, I think you saw back in week.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to say week three, maybe four.
I can't remember one of those weeks when you did
NOTE CONF
linear transformations, we saw the projection was a linear transformation.
We just hadn't done much projection yet.
NOTE CONF
And now you've done lots of projection.
So we know Italian transformation.
NOTE CONF
More importantly, it turns out the image of your linear
transformation is your space subspace U, which again makes perfect
NOTE CONF
sense because if I'm projecting down onto U, then I'm
going to get all of you because I can project
NOTE CONF
you onto you.
That covers everything.
NOTE CONF
And I'm not going to get something that's not on
you because I'm projecting onto you.
NOTE CONF
So I know the image is you.
It turns out the kernel is you, pop.
NOTE CONF
Because for exactly this reason, I only get to have
my projection to be zero if I'm perpendicular.
NOTE CONF
So the kernel is all the stuff that gets mapped
to zero.
NOTE CONF
That's all going to be in in the perpendicular complement.
Everyone so far so happy with me so far.
NOTE CONF
Good.
Um, this last part This is the bit that's not
NOTE CONF
proved in the textbook, but actually it is like the
simplest one line of proof.
NOTE CONF
We know that the dimension of the image plus the
dimension of the kernel equals.
NOTE CONF
What?
What firm am I getting ahead?
NOTE CONF
Another really big theorem.
N yeah.
NOTE CONF
Good.
What firm's this?
NOTE CONF
Rank.
Nullity.
NOTE CONF
Good.
Um.
NOTE CONF
But the dimension of the image.
What?
NOTE CONF
We just said that the image is you.
And we also know that the dimension this is u
NOTE CONF
perp equals n.
Cool.
NOTE CONF
I mean, we'd already worked that out because we said
we could extend a basis of U.
NOTE CONF
Into a basis of our N, and the number of
vectors we'd need was going to be n and minus
NOTE CONF
the basis of vectors we needed for you.
So it makes perfect sense, but it follows quite nicely
NOTE CONF
from this.
Okay, we have two minutes.
NOTE CONF
Do I want to do the last question?
Let's do this.
NOTE CONF
Last question.
We won't formally vote.
NOTE CONF
I don't think we've got time, but let's, um, feel
free to shout out to me.
NOTE CONF
What do we think?
So we've got a linear transformation given by a projection
NOTE CONF
onto a subspace which has some matrix.
It's a linear transformation.
NOTE CONF
So we know there's going to be a matrix.
If the nullity of my matrix is zero, what does
NOTE CONF
my subspace have to be.
We're kind of working backwards here.
NOTE CONF
Slightly harder question.
So I know the only vector that's getting mapped to
NOTE CONF
zero is zero.
So what am I mapping to.
NOTE CONF
Any guesses I win.
Yeah we've got to be mapping to everything.
NOTE CONF
Because if we weren't mapping to everything then there'd be
some other vector that would get mapped to zero.
NOTE CONF
There would be an orthogonal complement that got mapped to
zero.
NOTE CONF
Turns out if the only thing mapped to zero zero.
Which always happens.
NOTE CONF
It means we're being quite boring and just projecting onto
ourselves.
NOTE CONF
Cool.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
That is it for today.
I will see you tomorrow for our final new content
NOTE CONF
lecture.
We can all be awake for Friday of week ten.
NOTE CONF
It will be loads of fun and then that will
be that.
NOTE CONF
Awful lot with you.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
It just seemed like it was repeatedly interesting.
Um, it shouldn't matter too much, but it will still
NOTE CONF
be open now, so feel free to give it a
go now.
NOTE CONF
It might still.
Work.
NOTE CONF
I know.
Let's say.
NOTE CONF
Really?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
From last week.
NOTE CONF
Mhm.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So all all symmetric matrix is diagonal diagonalisable.
Um so we're talking a lot more about that tomorrow
NOTE CONF
actually.
Um but essentially.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Do they have to be invertible or.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
So they'd have to be invertible.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
No.
NOTE CONF
Why's.
Come up.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
No, no that's fine.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So yeah.
NOTE CONF
First related to the previous question of the more like
construction of axe on W firm.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
And but also because I thought it's going to be
NOTE CONF
here, it's going to be mapped into w perm because
of like in my mind construction works like we, I
NOTE CONF
imagine the line our project onto the line and gets
on the line.
NOTE CONF
But when you start that, it can be something either
because components can be different.
NOTE CONF
I got a little bit confused.
So how exactly what does it look like.
NOTE CONF
So so the case to think about here I should
probably turn this microphone off.
NOTE CONF